# Introduction

“Making” can mean different things to different people. For many tens of thousands of years, people have used their hands and minds to craft beautiful and useful objects. The fact that paleolithic peoples took the time to adorn and enrich their stone, bone, horn, wood, and shell creations with art and design is revealing about the joy and wonder we have always taken in the process and product of making. As technologies and modes of creation have multiplied and advanced, people have continued to love merging compelling form with useful function in their creations. We bake, paint, cut, code, photograph, sew, solder, write, fold, join, print, and design. When we make, we often can find the same kind of joy of expression and power of creation that our ancient forebears seem to have found. That is why it is so important to help people from all backgrounds, all ages, and all walks of life grow their skills and confidence as makers. Being consumers brings an easy but fleeting happiness; being makers and creators gives lasting joy, confidence, and empowerment. 

Because readers may be coming to this book with many different goals in mind, the approach has been to provide entry-level help on coding and making, and then to point the way for increasing sophistication and challenge for those who are ready. Sections on using and coding the Circuit Playground Express give novice coders the understanding of many of the basics so they can start gaining skills and having fun. The text then points the way for more experienced coders to go deeper with MakeCode or even jump to the JavaScript environment in MakeCode. Likewise, there are “birdhouse” maker projects with detailed instructions for making your own version, but then the birdhouse directions are followed by ideas for adapting and expanding the basic project in various ways, including ideas for academic tie-ins for the school setting. The hope is that everyone from the history teacher who’s an inexperienced coder but wants his students to do a making and coding project as part of a unit, to the professional coder who wants to share her love of code by creating a weekend makers’ workshop, to the kid who just likes to make stuff will find value here. 

How the instructor frames the project will depend upon the students’ age and experience, and upon the instructor’s goals. 

For example, one project is making a gondola. The instructor might say, “Here’s some pictures and video of gondolas traveling on wires. Here’s the available materials. We learned how to control a continuous rotation servo motor with the Circuit Playground Express during our last class; your task is to create a gondola during the next two classes. We’re going to start with sketching concepts. Ready?” 

On the other hand, the instructor might say, “We’ve learned how to control a continuous rotation servo motor with the Circuit Playground Express, and we just watched a video of a gondola. We’ll work together in steps to make our own gondolas. Your task is to create a gondola whose motion, light, and sounds reflect Hester Prynne’s character development in The Scarlet Letter. You’ll create your gondola, code the motion, sound, and light, then film a short video in which you narrate and explain how it represents Hester’s journey. We’ll begin by reviewing your notes on our discussion of how Hester evolves over time, then we’ll begin the gondolas together. Ready?” 

The first scenario is an open-ended engineering challenge. The second scenario guides students step-by-step, but then asks for a strong connection to concepts from another subject. Within both of these scenarios are opportunities to further challenge students who are ready. An individual or team who finish early might be enlisted as coaches to peers, they might be asked to switch from the MakeCode blocks to the JavaScript environment to analyze and then explain something about how JavaScript works, or they might be encouraged to add art or engineering enhancements to their creation. 

However you use this book, the hope is that you’ll experience the joys of challenge, growth, and creation that have been part of the human experience for all these millenia.
